# Digital Writing Exercises and Reflections - Liv De Lesantis 

## Week One - Introducing E-Lit and Digital Writing & About Me and My Practice
### What do you think digital writing is?
Digital writing to me is the junction of the written word and the use of technological elements to bring ideas and stories to life. I think the distinction between "flat writing" - i.e: simply blocks of text published in the digital realm - and "digital writing" is that the writing itself must be mobilised by an interactivity between reader and text. I think there needs to be an element of play and of agency for the reader - in that they are not simply just "reading" words  written on a digitised platform, they are experiencing, choosing, acting and even modifying the text. 
### What do you expect from the digital writing lab?
I expect to further develop my coding skills, particularly in the realms of CSS - as I've used HTML and "block coding" through platforms like Wordpress in my profession. I really want to explore how I can intersect coding with my creative practice, primarily in a poetry sense, as I think that would lend itself well to customisation or "remixing" the variables to create something new with each reading. I also expect to fail a lot! Although I've used basic coding at work before, this is very out of my comfort zone - it feels more technical than I'm used to, with more structure and constraint; something I struggle with in my own writing practice, and constantly try to enforce. 
### My Writing Style and Practice 
* I write primarily cosy crime/crime fiction and feminist/historical poetry. Most of my published work revolves around the pursuits of devious women who have left their mark on history - fictional or otherwise :D
* I usually use my laptop to write. I used to be a Pages fanatic, and do still enjoy using it for when I want zen writing space - i.e: somewhere I can write without the distraction of a cluttered dashboard or loads of comments. However, I mainly utilise Google Docs for workshopping convenience, and for sharing real-time updates with editors. I always have a journal on the go - it is typically an unorganised conglomeration of thoughts, phrases, excerpts, scenes, plots or characterisations that either I've observed in real-life, or which have occured to me whilst day-dreaming. 
* I believe I have to be reading a lot to be writing well. I think it wakes up my vocabulary and unclogs my writers block - to be surrounded by words, ideas and characters helps to hone my technique. I also find I read more like a writer when I'm in the swing of reading books. I tend to try to be observant and jot things down before I forget them, no matter where I am. Some of my most fruitful ideas have struck me in the strangest of settings or most innocuous of times - for example, the protagonist in my cosy crime novel got her name whilst I was watching a game of football and there happened to be a Watford player whose surname was Cleverley. Thus, inspiration struck for a stylish, fastidious, blunt and quick-witted detective.
* As an over-describer, I frequently write short stories to the guidelines of competitions or magazines that specify a word limit. This trains me to be more succinct and to focus on telling the story - I find that this has greatly improved my grasp on pacing and plotting. 
* I also frequently utilise music and ambiance as a tool when I write. I need to steep myself in the feel of the place my story is set in.

## Defining Electronic Literature - Reflections on Readings from Weeks 1&2: 
* ### What elements of the works ("Taroko Gorge", "The Gathering Cloud", "First Draft of the Revolution", and "Shade") do you read? How are they meaningful?
In contrast to analogue literature, where our sight into the text is dictated by the words committed to paper, digital writing plays with form, medium, audio, visual and interactive functions to transform the two dimensional into the three dimensional. The above pieces offer, in their respective ways, a sense of agency to the reader. What we read, the "written word" acts as a skeleton to the text, which will given its flesh in the form of technological features. As put in *Kissing the Steak: The Poetry of Text Generators*, "In digital literature the reader of the story can kill the character in the story, and the bomb can blink, tick and— in the form of a virus or a shutdown— also “explode” (Simanowski, R. 2009). So, whilst we read, we also have the autonomy to change the course of the story or its variables. Our eyes don't just skim over the words in the usual analogue sense of the word "reading", we must observe, act, think and analyse. In *Shade*, we are provided movement and agency, even though the parameters of our perspective are constrained to formatted text - we can move through the apartment, interact with objects and there is a distinct joy of play and the unexpected that comes with this. The same goes for *First Draft of the Revolution* - one of although we 'read' the central text, there is an underlying one that requires some detective work to uncover. E-lit places the reader in the driving seat - from which the text is able to metamorphose. In this sense, there's a connection between the "the creative imagination of the (human) writer and the constraints and possibilities of software" (Hayles, Katherine N. 2007, *Electronic Literature: What Is It?*), that allows for "reading" to take on a whole new meaning - a transportive, rambunctious and active state of movement. 
* ### How are the works read differently from print literature?/How is electronic literature different from print literature?
In print literature, our eye travels from left to right, left to right across the page. In the manga medium, it is the opposite. But in e-lit, there is no set rules regarding structure. The text is not simply "flat". It is a story within itself, as illustrated here by Simanowski (2009, pp.14) "when it comes to digital literature we need to “read,” or let’s say, to interpret, not just the text but also what happens to the text". As I mentioned earlier, oftentimes, the outcomes achieved by the customisable/variable text is dependent on the actions of the reader. For example, in *The Gathering Cloud*, the reader must move the mouse around and click to reveal more of the collaged words, images and symbolism, I find that each time I return to this piece, I identify something that I didn't the time prior. 
* ### What are the qualities of the works we might consider as qualities of electronic literature?
Taking *Toroko Gorge* as an example, there is symbiosis between the writer and the interface. Whilst we don't touch the screen to induce more lines of poetry, we watch them evolve and remix into new meanings in front of us. We've spoken recently about working with constraints, and how they assist in developing works of e-lit in profound ways - perhaps taking a small pool of variables and turning out millions of different combinations. As put by Jenny Hedley in the essay entitled *Digital poesis impulse: A methodology of creative coding with GPT as co-pilot*, digital literature is marked by the chameleon possibilities of text: "What type of poem or
game is this? How do I trigger the narrative to begin? Does this work have an ending? Is this a game, and can I win? Do I scroll, click or hover my mouse to activate elements? What does this digital entity want from me?" (2024, pp.4). 

## Electronic Literature Collection Reflections: 
* ### The Fall of the Site of Marsha - Volume 1 (2006):
As a coded narrative within a website with a host of characters, values and plot-points, this works as a piece of digital-writing. We don't just read the various different stages of Marsha's descent into paranoia, we are encouraged to click through and experience the story in a non-linear fashion. It almost builds a universe, in a way that regular analogue writing perhaps cannot. Where analogue writing cannot so easily play with form, structure, layout and visuals, this piece can portion out text to be interacted with individually, or create a "breaking of the fourth wall". This happens when Mike accidentally includes a "hidden" exchange between himself and his wife in a "password access only" section. The digital medium also allows the strikethrough throne angel voices to feel even more ominous, because there's an element of voyeurism created by the format of a message board. This made me think about how I could weave crime fiction into coding - I think I was surprised about how expansive the project can be; this piece has multiple sites, click-throughs and hidden elements that would work wonderfully for e-lit crime fiction. 
* ### Letter to Linus - Volume 2 (2011):
This piece reminds me of a labyrinth and an unfurled rubix cube - the more you click, the more variables there are, and you get small vignettes of conversational debate pertaining to each topic. You can 'create a narrative' by selecting different options to respond to the italicised question at the end of each mini essay. I personally feel that this weaving together of narratives, as done by the reader, classifies this as e-lit because it introduces that element of playful form and unexpected possibility. I like how it feels that you're in conversation with the piece - the tone reads as spirited back and forth with someone familiar. There is a sense of autonomy there that creates a collaborative poetry. I think I could utilise elements of this structure to code 'call and response', allowing the reader to interact with the poem and craft their own meaning. 
* ### Hobo Lobo of Hamelin - Volume 3 (2016):
I wanted to pick something more diverse in its elements than the previous two I've reflected on so far. This piece combines not only written word, but animated 3d illustrations that remind me of a pop-up book in the way they're contrasted with 2d backgrounds. As a piece of e-lit, this work is identified by its mobilisation of audio, visual and motion elements - perhaps more so than its interactivity. Although there is not a 'choose your own adventure' style for this piece, the reader is directly interacting with the text by adjusting volume and clicking through the slides. This work reminds me a lot of a comic book, but given a more transportive quality by the moving images and designs. Maybe it was the fantasy/fable setting, but as a piece of digital-writing, I found this piece was particularly effective in creating a strong world-building narrative. 
* ### forgotten nights - Volume 4 (2022):
I loved the interactivity and simplicity of this digitised poem. Just as there are thousands of stars in the night sky, there are thousands of combinations of poetic phrases that allow for the text to constantly evolve and take on new meanings. In this manner, it is not just a poem - it will forever be changing into something more, something that is incapable of being pinned down or defined. Having a "narrator" or someone who actually reads the poem to you as it develops also elevates this piece beyond simply the written word - you feel as though you're collaborating with the poet themselves, crafting this piece together. As with the other examples that I've examined, there are also endless remix and reset options so that you can create entirely new patterns every time you press play on the poem. I think that carrying the 'night sky' metaphor through the piece, especially in combination with the visuals, tied all the elements together seamlessly. I think one of the strengths of e-lit in comparison to analogue lit that I've discovered in reading this piece is the ability to round-out a creative concept - you can really immerse your reader in the mise en scene of your writing with the use of various digital elements. 

## Week Three - Coding Playground Remix Reflection: 
I wanted to add a link straight through to my test site which we changed up using the original template that Jenny issued us. [Click here to view my coding playground](https://liv-de-lesantis-test-remix.glitch.me/).

Responding to the questions for the week:

### What aspects of the remix are the same?
I've kept the overall feel of the piece the same, in that I've reflected on the intersections between technology, mental health and relationships and tuned that towards my own experiences and feelings currently. I've also kept the structural framework of the coding the same, as I'm still learning how to utilise all the functions in the CSS, Javascript and HTML areas. 
### What aspects of the remix are different?
I changed up the inputs for the Toroko Gorge remix, the Google Search function and the notes app poetry to suit the narrative of coming out of a relationship recently and the oscillating flurry of emotions this comes with. I've also woven in a lot of experiences or common phrases that I've seen on dating apps recently, though re-worded to suit the Haiku constraints - or combined with dystopian-themed adjectives as inspired by the original 'dystopian dreams' remix to further illustrate this digital world of romance; or lackethereof. I think I struggled a lot trying to come up with search engine results that felt tied into this narrative, as a lot of what has helped me is actually staying away from googling advice, I much prefer talking to those closest to me about these themes. Actually, the search inputs I populated the "searching" drop-down with are more accurate, as they have to do with how I am healing myself from this phase in my life, and where I am investing my time and energy. I also played with formatting elements, and discovered that for some of my Google fonts to work, I needed to paste the code into the head section of the HTML coding page. 
### Is the remix successful (why or why not)?
I think it flows together in such a way that reads thematically connected for me and my lived experience. I really like the more homemade feel that it has in comparison to a polished website - there is something journal-like about it that comforts me. I had a few bits of broken code throughout and was struggling with some formatting issues, so turned to GPT in order to help identify the cause of it, and was then able to fully remix it in line with the narrative that developed from initially looking at my notes app in the first lesson we worked on this. 
### How do you feel about coding now versus how you felt going into this in Week 1?
I think the distinct change about my opinion of coding now vs Week One is that it really is in the details - I thought, going into this course, that the overall cohesion of the code would be key to producing pieces that function and look the way you envision. However, the more I practice these techniques, the more I've realised it comes down to correct syntax and use of conventions in formatting. This felt like a hyperobject before we started. I hadn't really used this kind of code much in my work, and when I had, it was usually through a lot of troubleshooting with WordPress CSS forums - so actually being able to input customisable code that I understand is a big advancement for me. 
### Has your hands-on engagement with interactive digital literature shifted the way that you 'read' e-lit? In what ways?
Since we were shown the 'Inspect' function that is available on different websites and e-lit pieces, I've been really interested in looking at the internal mechanisms of how different projects function digitally. I think it gave me much more of an insight into the layers that go into building interactive narratives - there's so many variables that have to be accounted for in order to give playability and to world-build/storytell within the constraints of the form; including lack of audio, limited visuals, controls, word limits, etc. 

## Week Five Reflections on the concept of 'Ergodic' Literature 
According to the reading for this week, Aarseth proposes the term 'ergodics' as a way of dissecting the layer of storytelling that, in my opinion, feels most like it's describing choices/factors that advance the plot: "a situation in which a chain of events (a path, a sequence of actions, etc.) has been produced by the non trivial efforts of one or more individuals or mechanisms" (Aarseth, 1997:94). In relation to the development of my final project, I'm thinking of appyling this concept to the digital writing for interactive fiction space. In digital fiction, the story is often furthered by the readers' actions - whether that be clicking to reveal a new paragraph or passage, inputting an answer or selecting an option. I think that the concept of 'ergodic' is particularly relevant to digital writing as the chain of events is **_physically** **programmed**_ to provide an outcome/outcomes for the reader. Brainstorming ideas for my final assessment task, it is likely that I'll be creating some kind of mystery or thriller narrative - I intend to use the concept of ergodics to establish a chain of events that are mobilised by the reader actively participating in the 'solving' of the story. 

## Week Six: Reflections on Student Folios and Final Works and Testing out Bitsy
I was really inspired today. My group and I worked on annotating 'Stay strong xx' by Alyssa De Leo, which was an interactive fiction story told between a tween and adult version of the writer, pertaining to their experience living with cancer. It was extremely interesting to see how they had programmed Twine to change colours, fonts, utilise different clickable elements and format dialogue to characterise the story. As there wasn't much playability to influence the outcome of the story, exploring this narrative reaffirmed the vision of interactivity I want in my final piece. Additionally, I particularly liked 'House on the Hill' by Lara J. Scuri, a Bitsy, Interactive Fiction Narrative that was stylised in monochrome colours like a pixellated mini game. As someone who enjoys narrative-driven video games - such as Assassin's Creed, the Mafia Trilogy, Doki Doki Literature Club - this helped me to brainstorm some ideas of how I might translate my concepts into a final piece. As a crime writer, I very much enjoy the notion of being able to play through/change the outcome/investigate items, spaces, dialogue or events through the digital form. I am thinking of writing a murder mystery/horror game that allows players/readers to play through the crime either through the perspective of different characters - to find out the culprit - or perhaps making the whodunnit outcome dependent on the choices you make. I think this opens up the possibility for there to be several playthroughs, as well as the opportunity for me to introduce some of my favourite elements of cinema/game design into my work - such as audio and visual elements. I think I could also play with typography to customise different clues. I think this form will lend itself well to horror elements, or the building of suspense, as you will have to click or "feel your way through" the narrative in order for it to progress. One of the things I'm not super confident about, and which I'll need to practice in class on Monday and throughout the next week, is how to animate using Bitsy and Inform 7. I know that writing the plot and dialogue isn't going to be the issue for me, it's moreso the development of the gaming aspects. This is why I'm also tossing up whether Twine would be another worthy contender to execute this concept. Twine feels very intuitive and maybe easier to work with thus far, whereas Bitsy and Inform 7 feel a little bit intimidating and out of my comfort zone. I think I'll have a better idea about what platform I want to use to bring this idea to life after next Monday. 

## Week Seven & Eight: Plotting And Planning for my Final Project 
I've been planning my final piece for the last couple of weeks, drawing inspiration from interactive fiction pieces that I've come across through our assigned reading and also my own research: namely, 'Shade' (Andrew Plotkin, 2000) and 'Death Off the Cuff' (Simon Christiansen, 2010, Inform 7). These games combine the elements that I want my piece - "Who Killed Miss Jones" to encapsulate. I like the "choose-your-own-adventure" element of 'Shade', where you can progress the story by interacting with your surroundings. I want a similar narrative for my piece, which centres around an unsolved murder in 1960s rural Victoria set in the fictional town of Sentry Creek. I like the option of different playable outcomes provided as example in 'Death Off the Cuff'- wherein you, the reader, are bluffing your way through solving a murder. Ultimately, I will be playing with variables such as the if/else macros in order to create the _true_ solution and make it available to players/readers after proceeding through the four teenage girls' eyewitness statements. Each perspective should act as its own vignette, resulting in around 15 mins playing time for each self-contained "solution" to the mystery. My final project is inspired by my love for murder mysteries and thriller fiction. I write analogue whodunnits as my preferred genre of fiction, so going into this course I was extremely intrigued to learn about how I could adapt this theme to the digital space. A commonality amongst all of my narratives is female protagonists - not just as heroes, but as villains too. I really love exploring the psychological connections between women and committing/solving crime. I also tend to write in historical settings - so this piece takes place in the 1960s. I'm using Twine to create the project: I settled on Twine because I want this piece to be visually striking, with twists and turns that will build suspense. I've already been making lots of creative assets - like an autopsy report and photograhy of items that belong to the main characters - in order to establish clickable clues through image maps. I've found this method creates a "solveability" for my game. I love that coding has allowed me to utilise my ability to create graphics in a playable way. I want my readers to feel both suspense, horror and intrigue as they progress through the mystery. 

## Week Nine: Peer Feedback Key Notes on the Development of my Final Project
Today we workshopped our pieces with our peers and pooled our ideas to troubleshoot any issues that have been popping up for us. I've been really enjoying exchanging ideas with Farida, who is writing in a similar genre and platform to me. I have been utilising paper and pen to draft my notes; This is a link to my character profiles to illustrate my planning stage further. As I've been steeped in the visual creation stage for this piece so far, I wanted to share more of my plot and narrative concerns. I was particularly interested to hear opinions on what elements of a satisfying mystery I can translate to Digital Writing, and which I might have to tweak. A lot of my peers agreed that they liked the world-building techniques I've included through written word as opposed to using full-screen images to overcrowd my screen. They also really liked the plot twist that I said you would unlock - I was worried that the clues would be too hidden, and considered maybe highlighting them, but my workshoppers suggested that the adventure is in discovering all these elements for yourself. 

## Week Ten - Discussion of Final Project and Learnings So Far: 
Updating the journal with my thoughts so far now that we're 10 weeks into the semester: I've been really 
what were your expectations coming into the class and what have you learnt?
how has your creative writing practice developed? are there new directions? Or perhaps it has confirmed something about your practice as it was?
what particular aspects of code-based writing and E-Lit might inform your practice from here on? Perhaps you will take an aspect of E-Lit into an analogue space? Perhaps you will never go near code ever again!
 
